hello there this is the text file the needs to be compressed:
Alexandria UniversityBioinformatics
Faculty of EngineeringLevel 4
Computer and Systems DepartmentFall 2023
Sheet 2: Comprehensive Review Questions on Key
Concepts from Lectures 1-6 in Bioinformatics
Lecture 1 Questions:
1. Compare and contrast chromosomes and genes. How many chromosomes do normal
human cells have, and what are the exceptions?
2. Contrast the terms "gene" and "genome" in the context of human DNA. How many
genes have been identified?
3. Discuss the differences between transcription and translation within the Central Dogma
of molecular biology.
4. Compare the eras of biological research before and after the advent of bioinformatics.
5. When did bioinformatics become prominent?
6. Contrast the Human Genome Project with other genome projects in terms of
significance.
7. Discuss the importance of phylogeny and compare different methods of visualizing it.
8. Compare gene expression analysis with other forms of biological analysis. Why is gene
expression analysis critical?
9. Compare Micro Arrays technology with other technologies in terms of applications.
10. Discuss "Omics data" in comparison to traditional biological data. Why is "Omics data"
significant?
11. Compare disease biomarkers with other types of biological markers.
12. Differentiate between a "disease pathway" and a "therapeutic pathway."
13. What differentiates individualized therapy from traditional therapy approaches?
1Alexandria UniversityBioinformatics
Faculty of EngineeringLevel 4
Computer and Systems DepartmentFall 2023
Lecture 2 Questions:
1. Compare sequence alignment to other bioinformatics techniques. Can it be applied to
RNA or protein sequences as well?
2. Discuss the differences between local and global alignment, including their main
applications and known algorithms for each.
3. Compare pairwise alignment with multiple sequence alignments in terms of primary
uses.
4. Define and compare "scoring matrix," "scoring scheme," and "traceback" in the context
of sequence alignment algorithms.
5. Define Sequence Alignment problem inputs, outputs, and different methods
6. Contrast SNP, genomic variation, and allele in the context of genetic diversity.
7. Discuss the various types of genomic variations and compare the methods for identifying
them.
8. Compare WGS, WES, and Genotype arrays, focusing on cost implications.
9. Discuss the implications of non-coding regions being the majority of the human genome.
Are non-coding regions equivalent to "junk DNA"?
10. Compare the BLAST tool to other bioinformatics tools.
2Alexandria UniversityBioinformatics
Faculty of EngineeringLevel 4
Computer and Systems DepartmentFall 2023
Lecture 3 Questions:
1. Compare GWAS with other genetic studies, Define GWAS studies' input, outputs, and
methods
2. Discuss the difference between a phenotype and other genetic expressions.
3. Compare the Manhattan plot to other graphical representations in genetic studies.
Discuss its relevance to GWAS.
4. Discuss why the y-axis in a Manhattan plot is represented logarithmically. Compare the
chromosome representation on the x-axis with other genetic data visualizations.
5. Compare MAF, Genotyping Rate, and Hardy-Weinberg Equilibrium as Quality control
methods in genetic data.
6. Discuss the genotyping rate and discuss the role of imputation techniques regarding the
genotyping rate.
7. Compare PED and MAP formats with BED, BIM, and FAM formats, mentioning any
analogies
8. Discuss the issue of false positives in GWAS and compare methods to resolve it.
9. Discuus PLINK in GWAS inputs, filters, and outputs
3Alexandria UniversityBioinformatics
Faculty of EngineeringLevel 4
Computer and Systems DepartmentFall 2023
Lecture 4 Questions:
1. Discuss the role of population structure as a confounder in GWAS compared to other
study designs.
2. Compare false negatives to false positives in GWAS, including possible causes.
3. Discuss PCA and compare its role to other methods in visualizing population structure.
4. Compare different plot types used for viewing SNP-phenotype associations.
5. Compare additive, dominant, and recessive encoding types in genetic studies.
6. Discuss two-sample tests and compare their ability to adjust for confounders with other
tests.
7. Compare the utility of contingency tables to other tools in analyzing qualitative
phenotypes.
8. Compare discrete test statistics such as Fisher's exact test, χ2 test, and odds ratio
methods for testing association.
9. Discuss linear models and compare their assumptions with those of other statistical
models.
10. Compare logistic regression models to other linear regression models in terms of
applications.
11. Discuss Linkage Disequilibrium and compare its relevance to GWAS based on SNPs
with other genetic associations.
4Alexandria UniversityBioinformatics
Faculty of EngineeringLevel 4
Computer and Systems DepartmentFall 2023
Lecture 5 Questions:
1. What is UPGMA (Unweighted Pair Group Method with Arithmetic Mean), and what types
of input data does it require? Please define the main computational steps of the method,
the nature of the output it generates, and the specific distance metrics it utilizes
Lecture 6 Questions:
1. Could you explain the differences between RNA polymerase (transcriptase), reverse
transcriptase, and the reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR)
technique?
2. What exactly is cDNA, and how does it differ from genomic DNA? Does cDNA contain
non-coding regions, and if not, why?
3. What is a DNA microarray assay? Could you describe one method used in DNA
microarray assays?
4. How does a t-test differ from a correlation test? Does conducting one of these tests
provide insight into the results of the other? Please explain why or why not.
5. Can you differentiate between clustering and classification in the context of data
analysis?
6. What distinguishes k-means clustering from fuzzy k-means clustering?
7. What is a weighted correlation network, and how is co-expression similarity related to it?
References:
Lecture 1,2,3,4,5 and 6 Slides
5